Python enhancements blog (#12123)
pulumi/docs: content/blog/pulumi-loves-python/index.md

---
title: "Pulumi Loves Python"
date: 2024-06-28T16:17:38+02:00
draft: false
meta_desc: First-class Python support with Poetry, Pythonic input types and built-in type checking.
meta_image: meta.png
authors:
    - julien-poissonnier
tags:
    - python
social:
    twitter:
    linkedin:

---

Pulumi has first-class support for Python, and it is one of our most popular languages. We are always working to improve the Python experience, and we are excited to announce some new features that make it even easier to use Python with Pulumi, including support for Poetry, built-in type checking, and more Pythonic input types.

<!--more-->

<!-- expand on the introduction here -->

## Poetry

Pulumi has long had support to create and manage virtual environments using Python's builtin package manager [pip](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/). With the [latest release of Pulumi](https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi/releases/tag/v3.121.0), we are excited to announce that we now support [Poetry](https://python-poetry.org) as well. Poetry is a popular Python dependency management tool that allows you to declare your dependencies in a simple and concise way and manage your virtual environment with ease.

> When creating a new Pulumi project, the Pulumi CLI will now ask you if you want to use Poetry to manage your dependencies. If you choose to use Poetry, the Pulumi CLI will automatically create a new Poetry project for you and install the necessary dependencies. To opt-in to using Poetry for an existing Pulumi project, set the [`toolchain` runtime option](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/concepts/projects/project-file/#runtime-options) to `poetry` and run `pulumi install`.

Reviewer: In the next section there's a nice copyable/referenceable  snippet that shows how to set `typechecker`. Any reason not to use a similar snippet here (just to save the user from having to figure out how to do it)?

Author: Added

---

> title: "Pulumi Loves Python"

Reviewer 2: Feels a bit vague to me. I guess I wouldn't parse this as a launch blog post and may have skipped it.

Reviewer 3: Maybe: Enhancing Python Support in Pulumi: Poetry, Type Checking, and More!

Author: Thanks! The linter complained that this was too long, so I dropped the `in Pulumi` bit.

Reviewer 2: Not saying you need to do that, but you can override with `allow_long_title: true`

```yaml
name: python-and-poetry-are-best-friends
runtime:
  name: python
  options:
    toolchain: poetry
```

## Built-in type checking

Pulumi Python SDKs include type hints compatible with type checkers such as [MyPy](https://www.mypy-lang.org) and [Pyright](https://microsoft.github.io/pyright/#/). In the latest release of Pulumi, you can ask Pulumi to run your typechecker of choice for you as part of Pulumi operations and fail if there are any type errors. This can help you catch type errors earlier and ensure that your Pulumi programs are type-safe.

Add the typechecker of your choice to [your dependencies](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/languages-sdks/python/#packages) and set the [`typechecker` runtime option](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/concepts/projects/project-file/#runtime-options) in your project file to `mypy` or `pyright` to enable automatic type checking.

```yaml
name: python-with-typechecking
runtime:
  name: python
  options:

>     typechecker: pyright

Reviewer 2: I suggest we add a link somewhere in this blog to a full working example of a Pulumi app configured with poetry+pyright to show all the needed configuration in one place.

Author: I created a PR to update the aws-py-fargate example to use all the latest features https://github.com/pulumi/examples/pull/1656

>     typechecker: pyright

Reviewer 2: Should we have the `typechecker` option in the default template? What are downsides?

Author: I can't immediately think of any downsides. I'll raise it with the team to be sure, but it seems like a great idea to me.

Author: One downside that came to mind is that pyright uses nodejs under the hood. If you run pyright and there is no nodejs available, it will auto install it, but that can take a little bit of time. That might be annoying in CI?

---

> title: "Pulumi + Python: Bringing the Best of Modern Python to IaC"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
title: "Pulumi + Python: bringing the best of modern Python to IaC"
```

Feel free to ignore this and all other case changes if we decided against sentence casing!

meta_image: meta.png
authors:
    - julien-poissonnier
tags:
    - python
social:
    twitter:
    linkedin:

---

One of our most important goals at Pulumi is to bring the very best of software engineering tools and practice to your cloud infrastructure. Pulumi embraces existing popular programming languages as a way to tap into everything that these language ecosystems offer developers -- rich programming models, familiar syntax, IDE productivity, package management and versioning, componentization and reuse, testing, and so much more.

Python in particular has been one of the most popular languages used across the Pulumi platform, and the fastest growing over the last 2 years. Over the last few months, we've worked on a set of improvements that allow Pulumi users to take advantage of the latest and greatest tooling and features from the Python ecosystem.  The key new features include:

* __More Pythonic resource APIs__: A new dictionary-based API design which embraces a simple and familiar Pythonic API design along with access to great type checking and tooling building on recent enhancements to `TypedDict` support in the Python programming language and tools.

> * __Native support for Poetry__: Built-in support for working with Poetry in place of `pip`, making it easy to integrate Pulumi into project and repos leveraging the popular Poetry package management toolchain for Python.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* __Native support for Poetry__: Built-in support for working with Poetry in place of `pip`, making it easy to integrate Pulumi into projects and repos leveraging the popular Poetry package management toolchain for Python.
```

Maybe also `repositories` if you fancy

> * __Type checker integration__: New ability to run your favorite Python type checkers directly within the Pulumi deployment process.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* __Type checker integration__: You can now run your favorite Python type checkers directly as part of the Pulumi deployment process.
```

<!--more-->

## Pulumi + Python

Python was one of the first languages we ever supported in Pulumi, and has grown rapidly for defining and building Infrastructure as Code across any cloud. This growth has accelerated over the last year, driven by a few different trends:

1. DevOps practitioners with existing Python scripting experience who can naturally extend that experience into their IaC development

> 2. AI and Data-focused organizations with deep Python focus broadly within their organization leaning on IaC development which leverages the same language and tools

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. AI and data-focused organizations with deep Python expertise across their teams leaning on IaC development which leverages the same language and tools
```

3. Broad growth in the Python developer ecosystem

The result has been strong and steady growth of Python Pulumi usage.  This has been especially pronounced among some of the largest and most advanced Pulumi users, who are pushing the boundaries on managing complexity at scale using the best of the Python ecosystem.

<p align="center"><img width="500" src="growth2.png" alt="Pulumi + Python Growth"/></p>

> ## New Features for Pulumi Python Users

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## New features for Pulumi Python users
```

> ### Native Support for Poetry

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Native support for Poetry
```

Pulumi has long had support to create and manage virtual environments using Python's builtin package manager [pip](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/). With the [latest release of Pulumi](https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi/releases/tag/v3.121.0), we are excited to announce that we now support [Poetry](https://python-poetry.org) as well. Poetry is a popular Python dependency management tool that allows you to declare your dependencies in a simple and concise way and manage your virtual environment with ease.

> When creating a new Pulumi project, the Pulumi CLI will now ask you if you want to use Poetry to manage your dependencies. If you choose to use Poetry, the Pulumi CLI will automatically create a new Poetry project for you and install the necessary dependencies. To opt-in to using Poetry for an existing Pulumi project, set the [`toolchain` runtime option](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/concepts/projects/project-file/#runtime-options) to `poetry` and run `pulumi install`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When creating a new Pulumi project, the Pulumi CLI will now ask you if you want to use Poetry to manage your dependencies. If you choose to use Poetry, the Pulumi CLI will automatically create a new Poetry project for you and install the necessary dependencies. To opt in to using Poetry for an existing Pulumi project, set the [`toolchain` runtime option](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/concepts/projects/project-file/#runtime-options) to `poetry` and run `pulumi install`.
```

Add the typechecker of your choice to [your dependencies](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/languages-sdks/python/#packages) and set the [`typechecker` runtime option](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/concepts/projects/project-file/#runtime-options) in your project file to `mypy` or `pyright` to enable automatic type checking.

```yaml
name: python-with-typechecking
runtime:
  name: python
  options:
    typechecker: pyright
```

To enable live type checking in Visual Studio Code set the `typeCheckingMode` setting of the [Pylance extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-python.vscode-pylance) to `basic` or higher.

```json
"python.analysis.typeCheckingMode": "basic"
```

[Extensions](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/24146-pyright-language-server) [for other editors](https://github.com/emacs-lsp/lsp-pyright) [typically have](https://github.com/fannheyward/coc-pyright) [this already](https://zed.dev/docs/languages/python) [enabled](https://github.com/sublimelsp/LSP-pyright).

> We have updated the [NGINX on AWS ECS Fargate example](https://github.com/pulumi/examples/blob/master/aws-py-fargate/Pulumi.yaml) to use builtin typechecking and Poetry to manage dependencies. Check it out to see how you can use these new features in your Pulumi projects.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We have updated the [NGINX on AWS ECS Fargate example](https://github.com/pulumi/examples/blob/master/aws-py-fargate/Pulumi.yaml) to use built-in typechecking and Poetry to manage dependencies. Check it out to see how you can use these new features in your Pulumi projects.
```

### Pythonic input types

> Pulumi has always had a focus on making Infrastructure as Code feel like idiomatic code and the latest release of Pulumi makes it easier to work with input types in Python.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Pulumi has always had a focus on making Infrastructure as Code programs feel like idiomatic code and the latest release of Pulumi makes it easier to work with input types in Python.
```

This really pays off with large nested data structures, such as those you might use when configuring Kubernetes resources. Consider this program that uses argument classes to configure a deployment specification:

```python
from pulumi_kubernetes.apps.v1 import Deployment
from pulumi_kubernetes.apps.v1 import Deployment, DeploymentSpecArgs
from pulumi_kubernetes.meta.v1 import LabelSelectorArgs, ObjectMetaArgs
from pulumi_kubernetes.core.v1 import ContainerArgs, PodSpecArgs, PodTemplateSpecArgs

app_labels = {"app": "nginx"}
deployment = Deployment(
    "nginx",
    spec=DeploymentSpecArgs(
        selector=LabelSelectorArgs(match_labels=app_labels),
        replicas=1,
        template=PodTemplateSpecArgs(
            metadata=ObjectMetaArgs(labels=app_labels),
            spec=PodSpecArgs(containers=[ContainerArgs(name="nginx", image="nginx")]),
        ),
    ),
)
```

> With type hinted dictionaries, we can write the following, which is much more concise and just as type safe!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
With type-hinted dictionaries, we can write the following, which is much more concise and just as type safe!
```

```python
from pulumi_kubernetes.apps.v1 import Deployment

app_labels = {"app": "nginx"}

deployment = Deployment(
    "nginx",
    spec={
        "selector": {"match_labels": app_labels},
        "replicas": 1,
        "template": {
            "metadata": {"labels": app_labels},
            "spec": {"containers": [{"name": "nginx", "image": "nginx"}]},
        },
    },
)
```

> The new Pythonic input types are available in the latest release of the Pulumi SDKs for [Kubernetes](https://www.pulumi.com/registry/packages/kubernetes/) and [AWS](https://www.pulumi.com/registry/packages/aws/), with more providers SDKs to follow soon.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The new Pythonic input types are available in the latest release of the Pulumi SDKs for [Kubernetes](https://www.pulumi.com/registry/packages/kubernetes/) and [AWS](https://www.pulumi.com/registry/packages/aws/), with more provider SDKs to follow soon.
```

<!--more-->

<!-- expand on the introduction here -->

## Poetry

Pulumi has long had support to create and manage virtual environments using Python's builtin package manager [pip](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/). With the [latest release of Pulumi](https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi/releases/tag/v3.121.0), we are excited to announce that we now support [Poetry](https://python-poetry.org) as well. Poetry is a popular Python dependency management tool that allows you to declare your dependencies in a simple and concise way and manage your virtual environment with ease.

When creating a new Pulumi project, the Pulumi CLI will now ask you if you want to use Poetry to manage your dependencies. If you choose to use Poetry, the Pulumi CLI will automatically create a new Poetry project for you and install the necessary dependencies. You can also opt-in to using Poetry for an existing Pulumi project by setting the [`toolchain` runtime option](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/concepts/projects/project-file/#runtime-options) to `poetry` and running `pulumi install`.

> ## Builtin Type Checking

Author: STYLE-GUIDE.md does indeed say we should use sentence case

> * Docs and registry headings should use sentence case (i.e., first letter of the first word of is capitalized).
